Dr. Thomas Seaff Freed is very visible
online. He claims that sugar causes
cancer and that the best way to get rid
of your cancer is by cutting out all
sugar and amino acid glutamine
completely out of your diet. He delivers
that message convincingly and it
understandably raises a lot of concerns
around treatment. Today, I want to slow
down this conversation. Take a look
carefully at the science, the data
behind it, and most importantly, make
sure that people with cancer, probably
like yourself, are not left feeling
blamed, ashamed, or confused. Please
stay with me until the end because there
is some genuinely important and
reassuring information toward the very
end. Plus, when you get there, after all
the facts, I'll also share my opinion
beyond the science on the presentations
and the interpretation. All of that has
me very concerned. Hello and welcome to
Elevating Cancer Treatment, where we
explain the science and debunk myths to
help you navigate your health journey.
My background is a little different.
Beyond educating about cancer, I'm
actually designing new drugs that are
defining the future of oncology. This
direct hands-on experience offers me a
very different perspective of how these
cancer treatments work on the body,
interact with the cancer cells, and
cause side effects. And these are
insights that I'm excited to share with
you. If that sounds interesting, make
sure to like this video, subscribe to
the channel, and hit that notification
bell so you never miss an update. And
please share it if you find it useful.
I'm Dr. J. Chaplan. An important
reminder, I'm a PhD, not an MD. The
information in this video is education
and it's not medical advice. Every
cancer is unique and no general
information applies to everyone. Please
remember that. Always consult with your
health care provider for guidance on
your specific situation. And two quick
things. First, as a thank you for being
here, I've created a free resource, 10
things to elevate your chemo journey,
which you can download from the link
below. And second, by signing up, you'll
also get updates on that innovative
cancer treatment I'm working on. I'm
confident it represents a significant
advancement in amunotherapy. So please
take a moment, download your free guide
and join us in shaping the future of
cancer treatment. So recently I was sent
a video by Thomas Seaff Freed. He's
someone that I've followed for a while
now and I've discussed his work before.
The link on that is right here.
While I respect the interest his ideas
generate, and there is some decent
science behind them, I'm very concerned
about how some of his claims are being
presented and the emotional impact they
may have on people with cancer. The core
message that many people hear is that
cancer is exclusively caused by sugar,
large amounts of sugar consumption, and
that the rising cancer rates are
evidence of that.
When framed this way, the implication,
whether intended or not, is that if you
have cancer, you somehow caused it
yourself. You did something. You your
diet was bad and you caused your own
cancer. And that message often leads to
shame, guilt, fear, and depression and
franticness to change things.
Those reactions are not only deeply
unfair, they're actively harmful. As we
have discussed on this channel before,
link to our video on stress and cancer
is here. The chronic stress and
depression that people feel increases
gluccocorticoids and adrenaline and
other hormones that can protect cancer
cells. They reduce treatment
effectiveness and they increase the risk
of cancer recurrence.
It's not just a mental thing. It's also
physical and you are already dealing
with a lot. These emotional burdens are
the last thing that anyone with cancer
needs added to their plate. That's one
of the things that we help people with.
And debunking sources of guilt or shame
like Seaff Freed's claims feels like a
big part of what this channel is about.
The very first claim right there at the
beginning of the video was that there is
an epidemic of cancer and it's being
fueled by sugar. His claim is that we
have an explosion, just an explosion of
cancer right now. So, let's talk about
the numbers that Seaf Freed shared. He
put them up in the video. Here they are.
I clipped them out and there's a link to
his video down below. So those numbers
are real and they show that from 2013 to
2024, total cancer diagnoses increased
by about 17%. And cancer deaths also
increased by about 5%. Those are real
numbers and they sound alarming when
they're presented without context like
they are in his video, but context
matters enormously.
Okay, let's look at a different set of
data. also true. When you look at age
adjusted cancer incidents per 100,000
people, cancer rates for individual
cancers for both men and women, you'll
see that the vast majority of those
curves are actually trending downward.
Some of them fairly steeply. A few of
the minor ones have ticked up a little
bit, but overall, all of the large
players have been trending down, some of
them very significantly.
cancer risk per person has generally
declined very significantly. So, how can
these both be true? How can total cancer
diagnoses increase while individual
cancer rates are decreasing? How can
these both be true with such a big
discrepancy? And the answer is
straightforward and it's kind of in the
name of the second data set and it has
absolutely zero to do with sugar.
First of the two things that see left
out. First is population growth. The US
has had a population growth spurt. The
population of the United States of
America has increased 7.8% between 2013
and 2024, the dates that he was showing
data for. If nothing else changed, we
would expect cancer diagnoses and
deaths, the total numbers, to also rise
by that amount of as well, simply
because there are more people. Of
course, the total number of cancer cases
got bigger. Our population got bigger.
No statistics should ever be shown
without correcting for changes to the
base population rate. That's just lazy.
So 8% increase across the board. That
already wipes out the deaths and half of
the total increase in diagnosis. But
even worse, second thing, population
aging. This is really the big one. Over
that same period, the average age of the
entire US population increased by about
2 years. And that may sound very small,
but it represents a massive shift in the
number of older adults. Remember, the
people being born, the people
immigrating in are generally pretty
young. And to offset that, you need a
huge shift to older people. The
population of over 65 has grown from 40
million to 55 million during that time
frame. And remember, age is by far the
strongest risk factor for cancer.
Comparing people over 60 to those under
20, the cancer risk increases by 3,800%.
3,800%.
That dwarfs every other known risk
factor. For comparison, smoking
increases lung cancer risk by about
2,600%.
Nowhere near as much. And eating
processed red meat only increases colon
cancer risk by 20 to 50%. And again, I
know that 20 to 50% increase sounds
large, but remember that these are
relative risk increases. Since the base
rate for colon cancer is 4%, that 50%
increase brings your total risk up to
6%. Not 50%.
Okay? Since aging is the largest risk
factor for cancer, it is incredibly
sloppy to not correct for it when
looking at cancer rates. This is an
absolute rookie mistake.
When you account for the population
growth and aging, you're stacking an 8%
increase in cancer expected for
population growth on top of a 35 to 40%
increase because of the aging. And we
should be expecting a total of somewhere
between 37 and 45% increase in cancer
diagnoses and deaths just because of the
population changes. Instead, we're only
seeing a 17% increase in diagnoses and a
5% increase in deaths. So, this is not a
failure or an epidemic. That is evidence
of progress. Now, it's easy for me to
get caught up in those numbers and the
improvement that they've made. But the
truth is that every one of those deaths
is a person and every one of those
deaths is evidence that we've got a
tremendous way to go in both preventing
and treating cancer. There's a huge
amount more that needs to be done
because people are still suffering and
people are still dying.
So, look, there's no way to sugarcoat
that and I'm not attempting to. What I'm
trying to do is to shine a spotlight on
the inflammatory and blaming language
that comes along with a lot of these
things. Even if it's not intended, it's
there. The false promises that are being
dangled in front of people, which lead
them to spend energy, time, and
resources that they don't really have on
things that aren't going to benefit
them. So this progress in treating and
preventing cancer means we are
preventing more cancers. We are
detecting cancer earlier and we're
treating them more effectively. We've
haved the expected increase in new
cancer cases from 40ome% down to 17.
Yeah. And if diagnoses increased by 17%
but deaths only rose by 5% then the
fatal consequences of cancer have been
reduced enough that we've taken away 23
of the fatal impact for new cancers.
That's a major achievement.
The way that seaf freed has presented
the data gives exactly the opposite
impression to what it truly shows. A lot
of this kind of thing happens on the
internet. So we're really happy to dig
into the data that you're seeing and
provide a clearer and more useful view.
Okay. So now let's pivot and let's do a
simple thought experiment that the
physicists used to do this all the time.
So look at what would have to be true if
this were the case. Okay. So if
seafreed's claim that sugar causes
cancer were true, then people with
chronically high blood sugar, people
with poorly controlled diabetes should
have must have dramatically higher rates
of all cancers, right? I mean, look, I
don't have diabetes. I eat a zero carb
diet because both of my parents were
diabetic and I don't want that. But it
has nothing to do with cancer. I have
normal blood glucose. So if I eat a
sugary meal, my blood sugar will spike
after about half an hour. It'll spike
quickly, but then it'll come back down
to normal in an hour, maybe two. That's
me. But with somebody with diabetes,
many patients like relatives of mine can
have very high blood sugar all day every
day. One of my relatives had consistent
blood sugar levels between 300 and 400
all day every day. In those cases, every
cell in their body is exposed to very
high sugar levels constantly, and cancer
ought to be rampant, right? If it were
true, I'd expect to see 2,000 plus
percent increases in cancers of all
types across the board in diabetics,
just as we do for aging or with lung
cancer for smoking. Is that what we see?
No, that's not what we see. Not at all.
Not on either case. So, on average,
cancer risk in people with diabetes is
higher. It's about 20% higher. That's a
modest association, not a big cause.
True causes again look like thousands of
percent increases, not 20%. And again,
that's even less than the contribution
of processed red meat for colon cancer.
Now, that average also hides a huge
amount of variation, too. Certain
cancers, particularly those involving
organs that regulate or respond to blood
sugar or go through cycles of growth and
loss, those do show higher risks, liver,
pancreas, colon, uterine, etc. But for
many cancers, for most cancers, diabetes
has relatively little effect. And for
some, like prostate cancer and melanoma,
diabetes is actually associated with a
reduced risk. So, Dr. Seaff Freed, the
data is clear. And I want to know how
you explain given your framework how
excess sugar in the diet how high blood
sugar in a diabetic protects from cancer
protects from melanoma. Can you explain
that with your model? This pattern
disproves the idea that sugar broadly
causes cancer. It may be a factor that
makes specific cancers grow faster, but
sugar doesn't give you the cancer. So
why am I going over this again and again
and again? If you have cancer, please
don't feel guilt or bitterness over your
past diet. Don't think that you've
caused this. That doesn't serve you in
any way. And it's just not true. Okay,
pivoting now. Seaf also claims that you
can eliminate your cancer by eating a
keto diet and eliminating glutamine.
Now, it's important to separate these
two different questions. What causes
cancer and what may help during cancer
treatment? Those are not the same. So
unlike the sugar causes cancer claim,
which is total bunk, there's a ton of
data on sugar restriction during
treatment. And we'll have a separate
episode on just that because it's a ton
of data with a ton of nuance. But I
wanted to give you the highlights of
that right now. There is reasonable
evidence that reducing carbohydrate
intake during treatment can slow tumor
growth modestly and much more
importantly reduce side effects of
treatment. The biggest benefit of low
carb diets or short-term fasting is that
they slow down the division of normal
cells. What does that do? That makes
chemotherapy and radiation easier to
tolerate. That's because chemo and
radiation damage fast dividing cells. So
if your cells are dividing slower,
they'll take less damage. They won't
have to heal as much. It'll be easier
easier to tolerate. That doesn't mean
easy, just easier.
Let's be clear, no one likes chemo or
radiation. That's why we're consistently
trying to improve them and make them
much more manageable. Now again
repeating this since chemo and radiation
target fast dividing cells reducing the
growth of normal cells means less damage
and reduced side effects. Cancer cells
by definition continue dividing
regardless of conditions. You can slow
down their division, but they're still
going to try as fast and as hard as they
can to multiply themselves. Treatment
still affects them.
Now there are important caveats to this.
Extreme dietary restriction is not
harmless for everyone. I know that
people will say that this is harmless.
That is not true. Some cancers are
already fat adapted and will actually
grow faster on keto diets. In some
cancers, aggressive sugar restriction
may increase invasiveness and metastatic
potential. It can increase the
likelihood of spread. If you have a
cancer that has not metastasized and
your treatment options aren't that
great, they're just chemo and you don't
have targeted therapies or any heavy
hitters in your lineup, that risk needs
to be weighed carefully with
professional guidance. You may not want
to do a keto diet with a small benefit
and risk having metastasis.
This is why these approaches really
should always be considered as
supportive tools, not replacements for
treatment, and always evaluated case by
case. any general advice is likely to be
wrong. Every cancer is different. You
can't give a one-sizefits-all answer.
This is one of the ways that we work
with people to make those risk benefit
assessments based on your individual
scenario and not just general advice for
an average person. So, so that's the
sugar component,
but Dr. Seaff Freed's claim on treatment
was that you had to eliminate both sugar
and a specific amino acid, glutamine, to
starve cancer. So in animal studies,
restricting certain amino acids slows
tumor growth, but it doesn't eliminate
tumors. It doesn't get rid of cancers.
It doesn't starve them. It can't starve
them. There is no good evidence that you
can starve a tumor. We covered that. The
dramatic positive effects that are often
cited require metabolic poisons that are
not safe for humans. His evidence for
glutamine fermentation comes from using
a compound that trashes an entire
metabolic pathway. That's not glutamine
restriction. That's poisoning the cell,
which you cannot do in a human being.
That compound that he used in the mouse
test is banned for human consumption.
This is a fast way to get very sick from
your treatment instead of the cancer and
potentially die. This is what people are
afraid of with chemo, which generally
doesn't happen, but can happen with this
approach if you did it the way that he
did it. So, from a practical standpoint,
eliminating glutamine or serene or
glycine or other individual amino acids
that have been shown in mouse studies to
feed tumor growth, removing those from
the human diet is not realistic. They
are present in all protein containing
foods and your body can often convert
many amino acids over into the other
ones. Removing a specific amino acid
then means outside of a lab context
removing all protein from your diet. Now
again, if you were one of those mice in
a cage, you could be fed with a paste of
fat and individual purified amino acid
supplements for all of the amino acids
except the one that you were trying to
restrict. But we don't have that
doesn't sound anyway. But that kind of
diet, it just doesn't exist for people.
To remove both sugar and protein
entirely leaves only fat and
indigestible fiber. Basically, you'd
have a diet of coconut oil and sawdust,
something no one can sustain for the
long term. Now, the easy option here is
fasting. However, fasting for short
periods around treatment can be helpful
for some people. Long-term fasting or
extreme restriction is not sustainable
and it can interfere with having the
bodily resources needed for healing and
recovery. So, please hear this clearly.
These dietary strategies like short-term
fasting or zero carb diets, they are
optional add-ons. They're not cures.
They are tools that may help with
symptom management or treatment
tolerance. They are not magic solutions
to eliminate your tumor. They cannot and
do not starve your cancer. Your cancer
does not go away. It just slows down.
That's it. It buys time. It buys some
space. That that's at best. It slows
tumor growth slightly. And they're
absolutely not moral obligations. You
are not a bad person, nor have you
failed or deserve cancer if you don't
adopt them. Please do not guilt
yourself. Do not blame yourself. Do not
stress yourself trying to meet
impossible dietary standards.
Look, like we covered in the chronic
stress episode, which is linked down
below, chronic stress is a far more
damaging thing. That's been proven. It's
far more damaging than having high blood
sugar 24/7, 365, or some specific amino
acids in your diet. Yes, diet matters.
It does. Clearly, the data shows that
diet matters and you can adjust your
diet for better efficacy and managing
stress, maintaining emotional stability
and staying supported matter much, much
much more. So, please do what makes
sense for you. Work with your care team.
And above all, please be kind to
yourself. Now, if you've listened this
far, you've seen enough data to make
your own informed judgments. So, I'm
about to switch gears away from the
science and away from the data and share
with you my personal thoughts on the
topic of Dr. Seaff Freed and the
presentations he's making. Beyond these
videos, if you need more personalized
guidance or a deeper dive into specific
treatments to have your treatment be as
effective as possible, I offer
one-on-one sessions and medical
advocacy. I'm also in the process of
developing an exclusive video series
that breaks down each cancer treatment
and drug in detail along with
interferences to avoid and ways to
optimize for the ideal results. You can
find information on both of these
resources on our website which is linked
down below. Again, if you found this
video informative, please give it a
thumbs up, click the notification bell,
and subscribe to our channel for more
science-based cancer insights.
Frankly, I'm really puzzled how someone
with Dr. Seed's credentials is
repeatedly and enthusiastically making
mistakes that would get someone flunked
out of an introductory high school lab
class. The consistency that facts get
twisted into something that they're not,
like the numbers that we talked about at
the beginning of this episode, really
makes it hard for me to believe that
they're random chances or mistakes. I I
like to think the best of people, and
this is so consistent. It's really hard
to understand.
And while that's very disturbing to me
as a scientist, I'm actually much more
concerned by the long leadins from most
of his talks, which are designed to
create suspicion and distrust of
oncologists and other scientists.
They're designed to turn people away
from expert clinicians, from validated
literature, and from any other medical
support. And that feels a lot like a
cult leader or an abusive partner
isolating their victim to make sure that
only they can control the narrative and
the reality. It feels like psychological
manipulation, coercive persuasion, or
thought reform. All of which are just
politically correct ways of saying
brainwashing. While many people are just
hearing his material and trying to
evaluate it. And again, I I welcome
people asking questions, sending things
to me, asking what I think. I'm happy to
dive into it and happy to share like
this. Some people have changed their
entire worldview to follow what he's
presenting. And the intensity of those
followers feels much more like a crusade
rather than a discussion. And the vast
majority of those folks, and I've dealt
with quite a few on this channel, they
have preferred to threaten me instead of
discuss the merits of actual data. It
feels toxic and frankly I'd avoid the
entire area. But I also know that good
people are being confused and harmed by
his philosophy. So that's why I'm taking
the time to share the data in a way that
hopefully you can understand and it can
bring some relief and some clarity for
you for those who are asking and open to
scientific discourse, scientific
discussion. I would love to hear what
you think about the data I shared with
you today and what you think about the
information that Dr. Seaff freed is
presenting now.
Thank you.